Mr. Rudder didn't know that Dr. Byers had
restricted my area of work to work on the entering
students out of the registrar, out of the
admissions office. Now, when you first began
counseling and testing, Wayne Hall was the vice
president. Describe working with him. I'm very
fond of Dr. Hall. He was a man who, he had a sense of
humor. He had high standards, but he was very
pragmatic. I remember the ag students began to
complain because they had to take
the science advanced test, the GRE. And Dr. Hall
said, are you a scientist? And the student said,
yes. He said, well, we'll take you.
Dr. Hall,
he was a very fine person to work under because he
knew what you were doing. Now, Earl Rutter
selected him as vice president, didn't he? Yes.
Because I worked for Dr. Hall for two and a half
years, and to me, they seemed different in
personalities. Yes. And I've wondered how Mr.
Rutter came, do you have any idea how Mr. Rutter
came to identify Hall as the appropriate person to
be the vice president? I think President Rutter
was a very pragmatic person, and if he felt an
individual had the qualifications that he was
seeking, he would never let a personal
temperament or... Now did Dean, did Dr. Hall go
from being a department head to vice president?
No, he was dean of the graduate college. Oh, that's
right, that's right. He went from, yeah. And that
was one of the difficulties that they had, as I
understand it. President Rudder, like he did in my
case, he said, Wayne didn't handle both of those.
Well, that didn't last. And Wayne... It was
unfortunate. Now Dr. Bars, Dr. Bars is a very
brilliant scientist currently. Even if the boys
did name the oceanography Bars' last great
erection.
But Dr. Bars during most of my time under him, I had
sort of an uncomfortable relationship. It wasn't
anything except you'd go to see him and his desk was
clear. It had a little memo pad in front of it. And
you would make your case. And if he would reach over
and scribble something on that sheet of paper,
well, you could feel pretty good. But if he just sat
there, you finally got the message that he was
saying, get out of here. But I don't think he
understood us. Well, Graff told me one time, he
said, I think if I understood you, I could agree
with you. Let me put into this machine an anecdote I
remember about Byers one time. I was chairman of
the library committee then, and we were trying to
consolidate into the newly expanded, the first
expansion of the Cushing Library, and we were
trying to bring all the branch libraries in. And
architecture agreed, business agreed,
Veterinary medicine, we agreed, should stay west
of the tracks, that that was so separate. And the
other one was chemistry. And chemistry said, no,
no, no. That, no, no, we've got to have our own.
Well, our budget was so limited, and what we were
trying to do was to make our dollars go as far as we
could. And so we called a public discussion one
night in the library of this matter. And we asked
the chemistry department to come and make their
case and for Dr. Byers to be there since it all
reported to him. And one of the chemists, and I
can't remember whether it was the department head
or not, I think it was, he finally got near the end of
his remarks and he said, well, we had hoped not to
have to be this blunt with it. But we chemists do not
have time to waste like you other people do to spend
our time walking to the library we have too much to
do for that and dr byers said meeting adjourned
decision made chemistry library moved to the main
library it's over yeah that dr buyers without
question i i think that um Well, we had Dr. Byers
over in an effort to try to get a more cordial
relationship. And we showed him through the
center and what we did. And Dr. Holt was with me. And
when we finished, we
said, we enjoyed having you over, Dr. Byers. And he
said, anyone ever choose
He won't say anything, but he holds it and turned
and walked off. And I said, no, Dr. Byers, no one's
going to mention that. And I said, I'll escort you
back over to the cook. He said, that isn't
necessary. I said, no, sir, it isn't, but it's
going to be good. And I walked back over there with
him. Well, as time went on, Dr. Bars and I, we seemed
to be better. And he was never discourteous.
Haskell, Dr. Bars, is a great man, scientist.
But he was supervising something that he didn't
have a grasp of. What can you say about Bill Graff
and his years in between Hall and Myers? I would say
with all honesty that I think Texas A&M University
made an error in judgment in bringing Dr. Graff to
the campus for the work he did. And I think Dr.
Graff, it was unfortunate that he didn't
recognize it. I agree with you. And because both
sides seemed to understand. And it was difficult
on the people that, well I remember one time that I
got this study on the, you know, we made that famous
co-ed study. And the counselor said, that's what
we didn't want to do. He called me down there and
just dumped it on me. I said, okay, I've been
trained to do that. So we came back and we chose the
most logical approach was through the family. And
more than that, we could go through the youngest
child in the family, in the public schools, and get
the questionnaire out. We divided up the area, and
we visited superintendents. We did not have a
single person turn us down. Now, was this the study
over here in East Texas? No, that was Barton
Nelson. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And that was
unfortunate. That was a good scientific sample,
in my opinion. And Barton Nelson's a fine man. but
he was hurt by that. Because I remember I was on the
Aspirations Committee, and we used that study as
one of our strong arguments for co-education, for
broadening the curriculum. But I've always
worried that some opponents of those positive
changes blame, burden, for having done that study
and reaching the conclusions that... Oh, I think
that this happened. Actually, Dr. Nelson
certainly retained his reputation in sociology,
but I think that his chances are being recognized.
Yes. Well, Dean Graff had
what I would call an obnoxious personality.
He could be, and with me, could be very abrupt. Yes.
And there wasn't any, if I'm not mistaken, he was a
native Texan, but he wasn't able to relate well to
Texans. Let's go on to more positive. Share some
Rudder stories. Oh.
President Rudder, I don't have many of them
because I was not around him in a social situation.
But
President Rutter, he could handle himself real
well. A group of us flew up with some students to
West Point for a football game. And President
Rutter got up there, but he wasn't on that plane. We
were in the old cargo plane then. But he, I got the
feedback that he was very popular. He was very
popular. He could be tough, or he knew when it was
social, I guess. But my relationship I remember
the last freshman night that President Rutter was
alive.
See, we would have the freshman meet for that
night, and we'd either sing in the area
around the old movie theater or what have you. And
we graduated to having air conditioning in the
gymnasium, and so we had it in there. There's more
company. In G. Roddick White? G. Roddick White.
And I sat with Mrs. Rutter on the front row there,
and he spoke to the boys, the young men, about the
importance of choosing a good mate. life
expectancy. It was very simple but direct. And I
had no idea that that was his last meeting. But I dug
out this old song that's published a lot. warm beat
the hearts of all thy sons, old A&M of Texas, none
but the staunch, and goes through that. President
Rudder didn't recognize me. And so he got word to me
he wanted a copy of that. Well, I sent him a copy. But
I have... I know I was in some meetings. I was made
project coordinator of the Rudder Conference
Center. I didn't even know what it was. We were
flying back from Chicago. And
they dispelled it. One of the members of the group
kept telling me, you need to do this and you need to
do that. I said, what? I'm not having anything to do
with this. I came up here to help with a certain part
of it which related to what we need in this case.
Actually, I had chaired a committee that was to
determine what should go into the voter
conference. Well, we did a thorough job on that
aspect. We sent to every facet of the university a
questionnaire and welcome them saying, this is
what we would use it for. These are the things that
we would need. Now, this whole project began after
Mr. Rutter's death under Jack Williams? No. It
began, let's see, I think it was under
construction because didn't President Rutter
die in 70? 70. 70. Okay, so it was under
construction. Were we calling it the Rudder
Center then? No. That's why. Okay. No, it was not.
It was just the expansion of MSC and all. Yes. Well,
President Rudder said in Austin, that street is
dividing lines. you're responsible over here.
But don't get messing around over there. And he
said, I'm gonna tell them the same thing. He said,
the problem is that the faculty has taken over the
MSC. The kids can't meet in those rooms because of
it. And he said, I'm not gonna have it fussing back
and forth. Well, he took care of that. He took the
street out. But that was... That was something
else.
Finally, J.O. Adams was a great help to me.
He said, Well, just move along. You do this, and you
watch for that, and you do this. And I think he went
to President Rutter and said, President Rutter,
this fellow's got so many obligations now, you
don't know which door he's coming out of. And then
they, oh, the old boy that led the choir, Well, he
was the one that was chosen. He wouldn't take it. I
thought, oh man. There's one way you want to blow
yourself out of this place is refusing an
assignment. But he got away with it, but he did
because the president lived there a lot. But it was
good in another way. Bill Hensel took it over. Bill
is as solid as he can be. Now were you and your group,
were you all involved in any of the work that led to
the recommendations about co-education and
non-compulsory core and racial integration?
Well, yes, I think so. We, of course, everything we
did was service. Service. I believe that that's
the whole concept of guidance.
Sure.
You see, really, this first one to grab, grabbed me
on what to do with it. So he dumped it on us. Well,
that's all right. That's what I'm hired out to do.
But we had experience there. And so we devised this
information sheet.
Now that we have this machine turned back on, Mr.
Rutter dies, and you said a while ago that you were
not aware of his being in poor health or anything.
Most of us, I think, were quite surprised. Yeah.
Then General Ludeke was the interim for a few
months, and then Jack Williams came. Do you
remember any first impressions of him, first
acquaintances with him? Well, yes, I remember
my first meeting with him. We had a program, and
this was in 1971. We still had our program out, the
A&M adjunct. But the legislature in its wisdom had
taken it away and we wanted to acquaint the
president with the program. And we didn't know
what the future was, but we wanted to do that. Jack
Dobson was the director. I went with him because I
was the administrative officer responsible,
which I think was a big secret on the campus. I think
I was the only one who knew that. The third person
was the dean of liberal
arts. Because the courses, I mean, that we were
offering were mostly in the liberal arts. Now this
was Maxwell? Yes. David Maxwell? Yes. He said he'd
be glad to go with us. We were walking, the three of
us, from the academic building down toward the
system. And Dr. Dean Maxwell said, Austin, I'm
delighted to go down and be with President
Williams and help any way I can, but he said, I don't
understand why you're doing it because they are
transferring everything in, I think it was the
first of June. And I said, transferring what? And
he said, you don't know? I said, no, I don't know
what you're talking about. We are about
three-fourths filled. And you see, we'd send our
material out, and he said, well, we've got a real
reason to go then. We got down there, and President
Williams, as you know, he's very gracious. He
said, I understand you want to show me some things
about the NMA job. And I said, yes, Dr. Dobson is the
director and he will show you. And Jack said, I
don't think I want to. And Preston Williams said,
why? And he said, well, you're closing the thing
the 1st of June and I didn't know it until about
halfway down here from the academic building. And
he said, I'm not going to waste my time going over
something that Well, he meant it was handled that
way. And President Williams said, well, now wait
just a minute. He said, I've heard good reports
about that program and I really would like to know
what it's about. And then he turned and buzzed Bob
Cherry. And Bob came in and he told Bob what the
situation was. And Mr. Cherry said, well, I
believe the wise thing to do would be to call the
board and alert them to what had happened. And so
President Williams said, well, check with each
one of them and see if they would approve changing
the date to September 1st. And that's what Mr.
Cherry did. Was this the coordinating board or the
A&M board? It was the A&M board. Oh, okay. It was the
A&M board. And Jack was satisfied. Jack made a good
presentation. But President Williams, though,
what impressed me was that it didn't rattle him at
all. I think he kind of got a little enjoyment out of
it. He's taking a job where someone had messed up.
Now, I don't mean that critically because I
understand that A&M didn't really have much say.
that this was all developed and carried out from
the political side. That's what I've always
understood. And so we really had no interest in it.
But that was another of Mr. Gilchrist's ideas.
Here was an engineer that said, If we could have a
facility where we get these young men here and we
would go about in a business-like, systematic way
of what college is all about, I want the best
professors that we can get, and these young people
will do better the first year than those who don't.
Let's see. We'll save Williams for a little while.
Describe the adjunct. About how long did it exist
and describe the physical plant and so forth.
Well, the adjunct, as it was called, consisted of
about 500 acres of land, all of which the land Llano
River flowed through. There was a mile or so of
access to the Llano River. It had a beautiful grove
of old con trees along the river bank. It's just
south of Junction. Yes, just south of Junction.
Well,
it was almost in the city limits. It was, well now
the people of Kimball County had bought this land
and then turned it over to A&M. I think that Kimball
County was trying to get a two-year college and
some of the more knowledgeable people in the
community told me this. A&M felt they could make
use of it, but they didn't feel strongly,
apparently, about the academic two-year
program, taking it on. Well, this was in, the first
year was 1951. It was summer, 51. And we had a
contingent of freshmen that, two six-week
sessions. And we also had the civil engineering
students who did their practicum in surveying
one, one six weeks from one another. And the
geologists came for their field experience. And
we were mainly a base camp for the geologists. It
was, I missed the first summer. The rest of the time
I was pretty strongly involved. The first two or
three years I taught and was the, well the
equivalent of basic division. Cliff Ransdell was
the director. Then when Dean Bertrand,
for some reason, he made a move and he went from
Texas A&M to the University of Las Vegas or
something, somewhere up in the mountains, and
became the Dean of the College of Agriculture.
Cliff then had to take over the interim of the basic
division. That was the year then that I became the
director, and I was director from 55 to 59,
something like that. Director of? The A&M
adjunct. Of the adjunct. That meant that I had to go
out there. Well, it was delightful, really,
Haskell. There was no ranch house on the property,
and it was real nice. It was a wood-framed house.
And out there, if you keep your windows up, you got
air conditioning every night, and our children
could play. And the children of other faculty
members, Dr. Segrist headed up the physical
education, And he had a very good organization.
And he had a time in the afternoon when the children
of faculty could swim. And the interesting thing
was the faculty lived with the students. That is,
we lived in GI. which GI tents and then we put
permanent roofs on but we left the screens. We ate
with the students and in the in the program we had
every night a professor in each of the English
would be available at the administration
building to hold health sessions. Now, by and
large, what courses were offered? Okay, English
103, at first English 100 section, And then we had
math 101 or 102. At first it was 100. You know that
remedial stuff, after about the first two
summers, the parents and students, these sharp
youngsters that looked for things, that was too
good a thing. So it didn't take but a few years, and
the better students were coming out there. And I
would be filled by the first of May. So math and
English. Math and English. And then we moved into
biology. And we tried to teach chemistry, but it
just wasn't practical. It was a chemistry 100,
but... Now, it went for how many weeks? Six weeks.
Six weeks. Where did those six weeks fall? Well,
they would fall from about June the 1st to middle of
July. Oh, so you could do two, there were two six
weeks? Yes. But a student would...